VLMs. 3.2 Structured Text Prompts and Media Segmentation We evaluated how system prompts and explicit media intro/outro prefixes incrementally improve SmolVLM’s performance on image (left) and video (right) benchmarks, as shown in Figure 6. Each violin plot represents three checkpoints for a given configuration. System Prompts. We prepend concise instructions to clarify task objectives and reduce ambiguity during zero-shot inference. For example, conversational datasets utilize prompts like “You are a useful conversational assistant,” whereas vision-focused tasks employ “You are a visual agent and should provide concise answers.” The second violin plot in each subplot (Fig. 6) illustrates clear performance improvements from incorporating these system prompts, particularly evident in image-centric tasks. Media Intro/Outro Tokens. To clearly demarcate visual content, we introduce textual markers around image 5 Image0.300.350.400.450.500.55OpenCompass Average Score Video0.400.450.500.55 No System Prompt With System Prompt With Intro/Outro With User Prompt MaskedFigure 6 ∣Cumulative Effect of Training Strategies on SmolVLM Performance. The visualization shows the progression of performance improvements as different tokenization and prompt engineering strategies are applied sequentially to the SmolVLM base model. (Left)Image benchmark results show consistent improvements with each added strategy. (Right)Video benchmark results reveal similar patterns with more pronounced gains. and video segments (e.g., “ Here is an image... ” and “Here are Nframes sampled from a video... ”). The outro tokens then transition back to textual instructions (e.g., “ Given this image/video... ”). The third violin indicates that this strategy substantially boosts performance on video tasks—where confusion between multiple frames is more likely—and still yields measurable improvements on image tasks. Masking User Prompts Drawing on techniques from Allal et al. (2025), we explore user-prompt masking during supervised fine-tuning as a way to reduce overfitting. The right violin plot in Figure 6 shows that masking user queries (orange) yields improved performance in both image and video tasks,